---
title: Fun with A326344
date: 2019-11-27
---

The math department at Rutgers hosts weekly [experimental
mathematics](http://sites.math.rutgers.edu/~zeilberg/expmath/) seminars
dedicated to results or techniques which have some "experimental" flair. A few
months ago, [OEIS](https://oeis.org/)-founder Neil Sloane showed me
a fascinating sequence ([A326344](https://oeis.org/A326344)) before the
seminar:

$$1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 21, 32, 33, \dots$$

This sequence is generated by the following rule:

- $a(1) = 1$.
- If $n$ is prime, then $a(n + 1)$ is the next prime after $a(n)$, *with its digits reversed*.
- If $n$ is composite, then $a(n + 1)$ is the next composite after $a(n)$,
  *with its digits reversed*.

For example: To compute $a(2)$, note that 2 is prime, and find the next prime
after $a(1) = 1$, which is 2 itself. We reverse the single digit of 2, and we
get 2 again, so $a(2) = 2$. The sequence is boring until $a(10)$: $10$ is
composite, so we ask for the next composite after $9$ and get $10$, which
yields $1$ when reversed. Things get more interesting at $a(17)$: $17$ is
prime, and the next prime after $a(16) = 9$ is 11, which reversed is 11. This
is the first term with two digits.

This strange sequence has a surprising property, which we can observe by
looking at its graph:

![spooky](/files/bounded_reversal.png)

The sequence looks *bounded*! I've only shown the first 500 terms or so, but
this pattern persists for hundreds of thousands of terms. In fact, the pattern
persists forever: $a(n) \leq 909$ for all $n$, and this upper bound is
achieved.

This is spooky. Why should the sequence be bounded at all? Why 909? How can you
prove *anything* about such a weird sequence? This is what we'll talk about
here.

First, before continuing, I have code to play with this sequence:

- [Raw Python](/files/A326344.py)
- [Jupyter Notebook](/files/A326344.ipynb)
- [View Jupyter Notebook online](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/urls/rwdb.xyz/files/A326344.ipynb)

# Proving the bound

When our sequence was first submitted, [Michel
Marcus](https://oeis.org/wiki/User:Michel_Marcus) reported that 909 was the
maximum value up to $10^8$ terms. This is hard to prove because the sequence is
highly irregular. Sometimes you apply the composite rule; sometimes you apply
the prime rule. An induction argument has very little power in its inductive
hypothesis because it can't discern which rule should apply, or what rule was
last applied. The picture looks something like this:

![](/files/induction.png)

We need to reduce the number of possible branches to make sense of anything
here. One way to do this is with a "modulus" argument. Essentially, it is
easier to think about our sequence in blocks of residue classes with some nice
modulus, like 2, 6, or 30. This way, you know which terms in the block are
definitely composite, which are possibly prime, and so on.

For example, suppose that we try to prove something about our sequence by
inducting on blocks of two consecutive terms. One of these terms has even
index, so the composite rule applies. The other has odd index, so potentially
either rule applies. There is still some branching, but now half as much:

![](/files/even_induction.png)

This is the modulus argument where we use 2 as our modulus. If we chose
a different modulus, say 6, then we can cut down on the branching even further:

![](/files/6_induction.png)

"Larger" moduli will rule out more residue classes as composite[^moduli]. We
can use this idea to construct *computational proofs* that our sequence is
bounded.

[^moduli]:
    Generally speaking, you should probably always let your modulus be the
    product of the first few primes. For instance, $2 = 2$; $6 = 2 \cdot 3$;
    $30 = 2 \cdot 3 \cdot 5$. This rules out the maximum number of residue
    classes while keeping the modulus as small as possible.

In fact, the argument proceeds almost exactly how I've drawn it here. We will
construct a tree which contains all possible values of our sequence (possibly
more than needed). The nodes of our tree will be labeled with $(r, x)$ pairs,
where $r$ is the residue class in our modulus and $x$ is the possible value of
the sequence.

The procedure goes like this: Choose a modulus $m$ and compute the first $m$
terms of the sequence[^initial]. Let $x_0 = a(m + 1)$, and begin with a root
note labeled $(1, x_0)$. Iteratively do the following:

- Visit a new, unseen node $(r, x)$.

- If the residue class $r$ mod $m$ forces the index to be composite, then add
  a descendent of $(r, x)$ using the composite rule.

- If the residue class $r$ mod $m$ allows the index to be prime, then add two
  descendants of $(r, x)$: one using the composite rule and one using the prime
  rule.

- Mark any added descendants as new nodes to visit if we haven't already seen
  them.

- Add $(r, x)$ to a list of "seen" nodes.

- Repeat until there are no unseen nodes.

If this process terminates, then you have constructed a tree which (with the
first $m$ terms) contains all possible values of the sequence $a(n)$. The
maximum value of $x$ for all pairs $(r, x)$ will be an upper bound of $a(n)$.

[^initial]:
    The first $m$ terms require some care. There are numbers which, even in
    a "composite" residue class, are actually prime. For example, $2 \bmod
    6 = 2$, yet $2$ is prime. You just need to rule out the small, annoying
    cases less than $m + 1$ first.

Code to produce this tree looks something like this:

```python
def generate_tree(residue, value, modulus):
    """
    :residue: Starting residue class.
    :value: Starting value of the sequence.
    :b: Base of the sequence.
    :modulus: Modulus for the modulus argument.
    """

    possible_prime_vals = find_possible_prime_vals(modulus)

    # Contains (n mod modulus, value) pairs.
    seen = set()
    # Contains (n mod, value) pairs.
    to_visit = [(residue % modulus, value)]

    while to_visit:
        mod, term = to_visit.pop()

        if (mod, term) in seen:
            continue

        seen.update({(mod, term)})
        next_mod = (mod + 1) % modulus

        next_comp = backwards(nextcompo(term))
        if (next_mod, next_comp) not in seen:
            to_visit.append((next_mod, next_comp))

        if next_mod in possible_prime_vals:
            next_prime = backwards(nextprime(term))
            if (next_mod, next_prime) not in seen:
                to_visit.append((next_mod, next_prime))

    return seen
```

If we carry out this procedure with a modulus of $6 = 2 \cdot 3$, then we
obtain a tree with maximum observed value $909$. Therefore $a(n) \leq 909$.

These arguments have little to do with our sequence itself. The same idea would
apply to any sequence which depends on a rule that can be affected by knowing
the residue class of an index.

# The original arguments

[RÃ©my Sigrist](https://oeis.org/wiki/User:R%C3%A9my_Sigrist) gave the first
proof of *any* bound, essentially using the modulus argument with 2.

Sigrist's argument is computational: Create a set `EVEN` for the values of
$a(n)$ which occur at even values of $n$. If, say, $a(2n)$ is an element of
`EVEN`, then there are two possible "next" values for $a(2n + 1)$,
corresponding to the two different rules we could apply from our sequence.
After we know those two values, the next possible $a(2n + 2)$ can be computed
using the composite rule.

More explicitly, let $p$ be the "next prime and reverse" function, and $c$ be
the "next composite and reverse" function. If $x$ is in `EVEN`, then so is
$c(p(x))$ and $c(c(x))$, and these are all the possible elements we could ever
obtain at even indices.

Every value of $a(2n + 1)$ is the result of applying one of $p$ or $c$ to an
even value, so the corresponding set `ODD` is contained in the image of `EVEN`
under $p$ and $c$. If our process terminates, then we have a finite set which
contains the image of $a(n)$, which gives us *some* upper bound. This upper
bound may be larger than strictly necessary, but it would be better than
nothing.

This method gives us $a(n) \leq 939$.

Here is a short function to automate and illustrate this argument:

```python
def generate_terms(a0, p, c):
    """
    Compute a containing set for the terms of a sequence a(n)
    where a(n) = c(a(n - 1)) if n is even, and a(n) is in
    {p(a(n - 1)), c(a(n - 1))} if n is odd.
    """
    terms = {a0}

    while True:
        new_terms = (terms
                      | set(map(c, map(p, terms)))
                      | set(map(c, map(c, terms))))

        if new_terms != terms:
            terms = new_terms
        else:
            break
    even_terms = terms
    odd_terms = set(map(p, even_terms)) | set(map(c, even_terms))
    return even_terms, odd_terms
```

This method is essentially identical to the general modulus argument with 2 as
the modulus. It avoids explicitly mentioning the tree by keeping values in the
`EVEN` and `ODD` sets.

[Andrew Weimholt](https://oeis.org/wiki/User:Andrew_Weimholt) obtained the
correct bound of 909 by using a modified form of the modulus argument with
modulus 6. His modification consists of starting the trees from values where
$a(n)$ could "escape" single digits, then terminating a branch if it ever
returns to single digits. His algorithm is therefore something like this:

1. Determine all values of $a(n)$ where $a(n)$ could possibly "escape" single
   digits. Here, this can only occur if $a(n) = 11$. Further determine what the
   possible classes mod 6 are possible for such $n$.

   (This really can be done explicitly. If $a(n) < 10$, then the only way to
   exceed $9$ is to ask for the next prime when $a(n) = 9$. This means that
   $11$ is the only possible "escape" value, and it had to occur when $n \bmod
   6$ was $1$ or $5$, otherwise $n$ would be composite.)

2. For each possible escape value and corresponding class mod 6, construct
   a tree of possible values of $a(n)$ after this escape value. Each level of
   the tree is a different residue class mod 6, and descendants are the
   possible next values of the sequence. Terminate a branch if it ever reaches
   single digits again (or something else you're tracking).

If the trees constructed in step 2 are finite, then all values of $a(n)$ which
are greater than 9 must exist in them. Computing the maximum elements in each
tree will give us another upper bound for $a(n)$.

Here is an example of two such trees, produced by Weimholt himself[^tree]:

[^tree]: Weimholt, being merely human, breaks his trees into digestible chunks.
    His first tree has a branch which terminates at 101 rather than single
    digits, because the 101 tree is too big to digest at once. He then computes
    the 101 tree off by itself, which is the second tree.

```
n mod 6
-----------------------------------------
   1      11
   2      21      
   3      22
   4      42_______________________
   5*     44                     34
   0      54___________          53______
   1*     55         95          45    95
   2      65         69          64    69    
   3      66         [7]         56    [7]
   4      86______               75___________
   5*     78    98               67         97
   0      [8]   99__________     86______   89______
   1*           [1]    [101]     78    98   [9]   79
   2                             [8]   99         [8]
   3                                   [1]
```

```
n mod 6
-----------------------------------------
   1      101
   2      201
   3      202
   4      302_______________
   5*     303            703
   0      403_______     407_______
   1*     404    904     804    904
   2      504    509     508    509
   3      505    [15]    [15]   [15]
   4      605_______________
   5*     606            706
   0      806_______     707_______
   1*     708    908     807    907
   2      [17]   909     808    809
   3             [19]    [18]   [18]
```

Weimholt's tree argument also gives us the right bound: $a(n) \leq 909$.

This ends the story of A326344, but there is certainly more.

# In alternate bases

In the definition of A326344, we mentioned reversing the digits of numbers.
Implicitly, we meant the *decimal*, i.e., *base 10* digits. Had we specified
another base, we would have gotten another sequence. (In base 10, reversing 11
gives 11. In base 5, we have 11 = 21_5, so reversing the digits gives 12_5 = 7.
This really is new!) To this end, define a new *family* of sequences $a_b(n)$
for each integer $b \geq 2$:

- $a_b(1) = 1$.

- If $n$ is prime, then $a_b(n + 1)$ is the next prime after $a_b(n)$, *with
  its base $b$ digits reversed*.

- If $n$ is composite, then $a_b(n + 1)$ is the next composite after $a_b(n)$,
  *with its base $b$ digits reversed*.

For example, $a_7(n)$ begins like this (in decimal):

$$1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 1, 4, 6, 8, 29, 18, 37, 26, 45, 34, 19, 44, 41, \dots$$

The obvious question about $a_b(n)$ is whether it is bounded for all $b$.
answer, so far, is *probably*. The modulus argument, when automated, seems to
always succeed in tightly bounding $a_b(n)$ from above. The known maxima are
given in [A327701](https://oeis.org/A327701). However, we do not know if *all*
of these sequences are bounded. I have some wonderful data to suggest that they
are:

![wonderful data](/files/empirical_maxima.png)

It seems like $a_b(n)$ is bounded almost perfectly by $b^3$. Thus far, I've had
little success proving this. The modulus argument seems to always work, but it
really depends on the particulars of each base. That is, it seems like each
$a_b(n)$ gets "lucky" in how it remains bounded by $b^3$. It is mysterious why
the modulus argument should always work. It is also mysterious why $b^3$ is the
important quantity. Why not $b^2$? Or $b$? Or $b^{3 / 2}$?

For the time being, nearly everything about these sequences remains open.

# Conjectures to prove

Here are a few conjectures about our family of sequences that would be nice to
prove:

- $a_b(n) < b^3$.
- $a_b(n) < p$, where $p$ is the largest prime less than $b^3$.
- $\max_n a_b(n) = b - 1$ iff $b - 1$ is 1 or an odd prime.
    - I can prove that $\max_n a_b(n) = b - 1$ if $b - 1$ is 1 or an odd prime,
      and I can prove that the sequence exceeds $b - 1$ if $b$ is prime and
      $b-1$ is composite. I *cannot* prove that the sequence exceeds $b-1$ if
      both $b$ and $b - 1$ are composite.
