---
title: The Oglethorpe Bowls
tags:
    - Oglethorpe
    - awards
---

At Oglethorpe's 2019 commencement I was presented with both the Sally Hull
Weltner Award for Scholarship and the James Edward Oglethorpe Award. The Sally
Weltner award is a very nice bowl which "honors the student in the graduating
class who has attained the highest grade-point average with the greatest number
of hours in course work completed at the university." The James Edward
Oglethorpe award is "presented annually to two individuals in the graduating
class who, in the opinion of the faculty, have excelled in scholarship,
leadership and character."

I was honored to share the Sally Weltner award with my fellow Honors student
and friend Gillian Rabin. (Ties are unusual for the Sally Weltner award, but
happily not this year!) I have known Gillian since our shared Scholarship
Weekend with the theater department four years ago. She has been a remarkable
student and performer over the years, causing delight and reflection whenever
she takes the stage. It was wonderful to even stand on a stage with an actress
like her.

I was also honored to share the James Edward Oglethorpe Award with my good
friend Brad Firchow. I cannot think of any individual who exemplifies
leadership and character the way Brad does. To be frank, he is clearly carrying
the weight of the award in those two categories this year. I will always
remember Brad's influence on my outlook on the core and art. This is to say
nothing about the things that Brad actually accomplished at Oglethorpe, which
are numerous and impressive. He was the best person to receive the award.

When I explained to my family what the James Edward Oglethorpe Award was, my
dad called it the "teacher's pet award." There is some truth to this. I
certainly would not have won the award without the votes of the Oglethorpe
faculty which I cherish so much. Their recognition means far more than any
diploma I obtained that day.

I am not quite finished with academia. I am now a graduate student in the
mathematics department at Rutgers University. Even being so far away, I will
surely return to Oglethorpe from time to time in person and on this blog if
anything notable happens.
