---
title: Held Accountable
date: 2021-11-23
---

A few weeks ago, I asked my fellow graduate students to give their list of the
"Top N Mathematicians of All Time." In return, I was [publicly shamed by by my
good frenemy](https://twitter.com/corrine_yap/status/1461473396726796289),
K[^K].

[^K]: Name changed to protect the guilty.

My list of top mathematicians contained only White men. From this, K claims
that my question created an unsafe and exclusionary space in the department for
women, and intended to "hold me accountable for my actions." She delivered
a talk to the graduate students entitled "A Clapback Talk: what a recent Slack
thread reveals about inclusivity in math."

Well, consider me held accountable.

K's arguments fall in two main directions.

1. Mathematics is not a competition, and we shouldn't rank people.

2. Mathematics has historically excluded women, and by not acknowledging this
we perpetuate that exclusion.

## MATHEMATICS IS A COMPETITION

K's favorite phrase is "mathematics does not exist in a vacuum." I agree, it
does not. It exists in societies with finite resources. We can't hand over
infinite amounts of time and money so that very privileged people can sit in
lecture halls all day thinking about "mathematical truth." It is lovely that
mathematics is a boundless ocean of knowledge or whatever, but we have houses
to build, bridges to repair, and doctors to train.

We have finitely many dollars to do mathematics. How do we allocate them? We
can only afford to accept so many graduate students, hire so many professors,
fund so many postdocs, and so on. It would be stupid to make these choices at
random, so we have systems to decide who gets money. You're welcome to pretend
that these systems don't exist, but most people will work to put themselves in
the "funded" category. This is competition.

Unless you think we should put limitless funds into mathematics (and we
probably literally *can't*), mathematics as a social activity will not exist
without competition.

In many mathematics departments around the country, graduate students are
privileged enough to ignore competition. You have to compete to get there, but
after that you're basically safe. You don't have to apply for grants or
fellowships or anything like that. Just pass your exams, don't harass your
students, and you get money for five to seven years. Everyone is allowed to do
more-or-less whatever they want and poor performance has few consequences. (If
I hear "grades don't matter" one more time, I will lose it.) We sit in a cushy
ivory tower and talk about how "it's not a competition." Nonsense.

Compare this state of affairs to sports. Despite what your closed-minded
academic friends might think, sports are an art form. They reflect the extremes
of humanity: Camaraderie. Rivalries. Triumphs. Falls. Determination. Pettiness.
All of human nature on display, driven by superstar, larger-than-life figures.

At first glance, athletes at the highest levels seem like special people. They
want glory, to be champions, to be one of the greats. [Michael Jordan takes
everything personal?](youtube.com/watch?v=Ss5Ndz0tn9o) Inject it into my veins.
[Tom Brady counting off all six quarterbacks picked before
him?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o5fdhfVrg1I) Captivating. After winning
two gold medals at the 2016 Rio Olympics, what was Elaine Thompson-Herah's goal
for Tokyo 2020? ["Get three gold
medals."](https://olympics.com/en/featured-news/exclusive-elaine-thompson-herah-disappointment-makes-you-better-and-stronger)

We love athletes because they are *not* special. They are like "funhouse
mirror" reflections of ourselves, distorting our natural features almost beyond
recognition. Competition, envy, and greed are normal. They drive us to be
better.

Richard Hamming says as much in ["You and Your
Research"](https://www.cs.virginia.edu/~robins/YouAndYourResearch.html):

> At Los Alamos I was brought in to run the computing machines which other
people had got going, so those scientists and physicists could get back to
business. I saw I was a stooge. I saw that although physically I was the same,
they were different. And to put the thing bluntly, I was envious.

Chess grandmaster Bobby Fischer said that the greatest pleasure of winning a
game of chess is ["when you break [your opponent's]
ego.](https://youtu.be/boyYKCr3T8w?t=349) Hardy wrote "A man's first duty, a
young man's at any rate, is to be ambitious." Even *Obama* is competitive:

> Mr. Obama's obsession with virtuosity and proving himself the best are
remarkable. ... More than a tic, friends and aides say, it is a core part of
his worldview, formed as an outsider child who grew up to defy others' views of
the limits of his abilities.

If you are, by nature, less competitive than your peers, or find it
distasteful, that's fine. No one is forcing you to be as intense as Michael
Jordan or Tiger Woods. However, do not expect to be funded to prance around
academia forever. There is no "right" to be an academic. If you want to be one,
accept competition.

## EVERYTHING IS EXCLUSIONARY

We can all agree: Mathematics was grotesquely exclusionary until like, twenty
years ago. There are probably ways that it still is. We should look into that.
But what does this have to do with how great Euler was?

Again, I wish more of us were sports fans.

When I look at the greatest basketball players of all time, I don't find a lot
of 5'9" Whites from South Carolina. I don't see a lot of Asians, or Hispanics,
or anything else. Just Black men. And that's...fine? I don't see how this takes
anything away from me. Of course, I'm White, so maybe I'm just "letting them
have one." Then why is the NBA the biggest sports league in China, despite
having only *one* good Chinese player ever? What would K's objection in this
context even look like? I walk into a pickup game and ask everyone to stop
yelling "Kobe" when they take a shot?

No one is excluded from mathematics by being left off the list of "best
mathematicians." They are excluded because of things that people did in the
past. That's a shame. We shouldn't do those things anymore. But we also can't
change what was done in the past.

Maybe there would have been dozens of incredibly influential female
mathematicians if we were more welcoming to them. Maybe Frederick Douglass
would have been a legendary president if America were not suffocated by racism
during his life. Maybe every poor kid in Missouri on food stamps could be the
next Einstein if they had the resources.

Maybe maybe maybe maybe. Maybe this, maybe that. We don't know. We can't know.
There are infinitely many "maybes," and every choice produces infinitely many
more. We cannot refuse to talk about the past because someone was excluded. All
we can do is make choices *now* based on what happened.

If you want to discuss "most promising mathematicians which were not allowed to
do mathematics," then go for it. I love "what if's." But this is simply
a *different* discussion than "most influential mathematicians," not a *better*
one. To suggest that either is "unsafe" is just as naive as saying that
"mathematics is not a competition."

The really sinister thing here is that the charge of "being exclusionary" is
too vague to answer. How could you possibly prove that you are *not* being
exclusionary? It's a rhetorical flourish to combat a deeper problem: There are
not enough women in mathematics Ph.D programs.

[Roughly 40% of mathematics and statistics undergraduates are women, but that
drops to around 25% in Ph.D
programs](https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2017/nsf17310/digest/fod-women/mathematics-and-statistics.cfm).
That's a big gap. K, like many of us, thinks that there are "bad things"
dissuading women from joining Ph.D programs, and she would like to fix them.
But K, like most of us, doesn't have much control over the situation. You can
only attend so many conferences for women, run so many woman-focused
organizations, and lobby so hard for your graduate director to accept more
women before you realize that changing demographics is very slow. So, if you're
really driven to bring in more women and secure their place in academia, you
have to find something else to do.

While K encouraged a crowd to "hold me accountable," I wondered: Did we truly
need to have this conversation, or is K just lashing out at the only target
they can hit? Just last month we found [a math department
nazi](/i-hate-new-jersey-nazis) who was in charge of both K and myself for
a while. We can't do anything about that now, but maybe it's getting hard to
distinguish "nazi" from "people who disagree with me."

In any event, I'm glad we all had a nice, relaxing reeducation session
together. Happy Thanksgiving.

\[*Note*: In an earlier version of this post, I used K's name and insinuated
that they were a "bully" in a deleted paragraph. After reflection, the former
felt like airing dirty laundry, and the latter was just mean-spirited. Both are
gone now. Thanks for the feedback!\]
