---
title: Admission to Candidacy
hide: true
---

On Monday, 2021 May 17, I passed my oral qualifying exam at Rutgers University.
This means that I have *advanced to candidacy*. In other words, I have cleared
the necessary hurdles to be a "real" PhD student, and am "ready" to be a
researcher.

Of course, this implicitly means that I was *incapable* of doing research
before passing my exams. [The paper I published with my
advisor](/publications/gcf) didn't count. [The paper I co-authored with my
post-qual friend](/publications/dyck) was phoney. [The collaboration my advisor
and I had with a computer algebra wizard ](/publications/beukers) was
fraudulent. Even the [expository article](/publications/az-recurrences) I wrote
can only be described as *pre-candidacy material*[^quality].

[^quality]: I don't think that my outlined contributions are particularly
              *good*. I didn't prove $P = NP$ or the Riemann hypothesis. But I
              did do *research* in some small form.

Thankfully, now that I am a "PhD candidate" as opposed to a mere "graduate
student," the tides will turn. Indeed, with some luck, both the *quality* and
*quantity* of my work will improve because I am not *wasting my time on
formalities.*

The purpose of a PhD program is to produce competent researchers. The *Big Lie*
about qualifying exams is that they support this purpose. In truth, qualifying
exams are mostly *redundant*. They measure things that the department already
knows. They exist *only* to place students into high-risk, low-reward
situations for long periods of time, which detracts from their opportunities to
do research.

I propose a modification to the qualifying exam structure, but let's first see
how they work at Rutgers now.

**Written Qualifying Exam.** This is a sequence of three 2.5 hour-long exams on
the three courses you take in your first semester. In each, you are asked five
random questions, and have to answer three correctly (on average) to pass.  You
have three attempts, which will take you a full year to exhaust. The written
qualifying exam supposedly measures your technical ability in "basic"
mathematical subjects.

"But wait," I hear you ask. "The exams are on the courses you took in your
first semester? Didn't you get grades in those courses? Don't those already
measure your ability?"

I am sorry to tell you that the current program mostly disregards your
coursework. "Your grades don't matter" is a common refrain among graduate
students because it is true. Slave over every homework assignment? Go to every
office hour? Get perfect marks on every midterm? Congratulations! You have
achieved nothing. *One* exam, completed under threat of expulsion, is the
department's *ultimate measure* of technical mastery.

Of course, your grade *is* a measure of your ability. You spent an entire
semester completing homework assignments, taking exams, and interacting with
your professors. The department would *already know* who puts in work and who
is "technically competent" if it cared to look.

I see two possibilities:

1. The department is out-of-touch with student assessment or does not trust
   professors to evaluate students.

2. The department wants to haze you.

Which do you think it is?

**Oral Qualifying Exam.** This is an 80-120 minute long meeting with a
committee of four faculty members. You will be questioned on a syllabus that
you wrote in consultation with your committee. In theory you have two attempts,
but it is exceedingly rare to fail. Supposedly this exam ensures that you have
not "overspecialized" before beginning research.

Unlike the written qualifying exam, there is no "standard" oral exam. Your
experience is highly dependent on your area and advisor. This gives it some
merit: Your syllabus is likely relevant to your proposed research, and the exam
is graded *subjectively* by your committee members. However, this subjectivity
makes the exam, again, redundant.

Suppose that your committee is confident that you will pass. Perhaps you've
been meeting with them regularly to discuss your syllabus. What, in this case,
is the purpose of the exam? Don't they already know your knowledge? Suppose
instead that your committee is confident that you will *not* pass. Then why on
Earth are you taking the exam? In both cases, the exam merely makes you
demonstrate what the committee *already knows* in a high-pressure situation.

The only situation where the exam has *true* merit is when the committee does
not know if you are ready. I posit that this situation is *nearly nonexistant*.
If it were a common occurrence, then there would be a significant number of
failed oral qualifying exams. There are not.

The benefit of the oral exam process is having four faculty members sign off on
your skills. This has nothing to do with the *exam*, and everything to do with
how well the committee knows you.

**The Problem.** Qualifying exams *take time that you could be doing research*.
If you demonstrate mastery of your first-semester courses, then you should
spend your second semester and the subsequent Summer meeting with potential
advisors. Doing anything else is a *waste of time*, as far as producing
researchers goes.

**The Solution.**

Here is a proposal:

- Offer a written qualifying exam to students as soon as they arrive.
    - Pass? Skip relevant first semester required courses.
    - Fail? Take relevant first semester required courses.

- First semester required courses.
    - A? Continue in the program.
    - Less than an A? You must pass a written qualifying exam by the end of
      your first Summer.

- Oral exams are replaced with a requirement that four faculty members agree
  that you know your syllabus sufficiently well. It is up to them to decide if
  a formal exam is necessary.

Nothing I've said seems specific to Rutgers. I assume that this silly exam
process happens at most mathematics departments. Perhaps the situation is
similar in other STEM areas, and perhaps even in the humanities. All the more
reason to evaluate the evaluators.
