---
title: Omicron at Rutgers
date: 2021-12-21
---

As the Fall semester comes to an end, the world is being assaulted by a new
COVID variant:
[Omicron](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/variants/omicron-variant.html).

We're still learning about Omicron, but the first thing that jumps out is that
it is *astonishingly* transmissible. [New York recently set a record
**21,000+** cases in a single
day.](https://www.cnn.com/2021/12/17/health/us-coronavirus-friday/index.html)
The previous peak was around 20,000 in January, when under 10% of the
population had received any vaccination. Now at a *70% vaccination* rate, when
we would expect the spread to be slower, we're smashing records.

![NY bad](/images/ny-covid.png)
(COVID cases in New York, [New York
Times](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/us/new-york-covid-cases.html))

I'm feeling a strong sense of *deja vu*. [Dozens of NBA players suddenly tested
positive](https://www.nba.com/news/nba-postpones-5-upcoming-games-due-to-health-and-safety-protocols)
causing the league to postpone a week's worth of games, [Cornell shut down its
campus after a COVID
outbreak](https://www.cnn.com/2021/12/14/us/cornell-university-covid-cases/index.html),
and [Harvard has committed to a partially-online
January](https://nypost.com/2021/12/18/harvard-university-going-remote-over-omicron-covid-variant/).
It's like last year all over again. Everyone is freaking out, every day
a sports league or school shuts down, and we're all watching cases rise to
higher and higher peaks.

This all raises the obvious thought: What will Rutgers do in the Spring? With
cases skyrocketing, will the university panic and move everything online again?

Everything rides on three questions: How transmissible is Omicron, how severe
is the average Omicron infection for the vaccinated, and when will we know
answers to these questions?

The first answer is bad. If we are in person, then we will likely see a spike
in cases. The [Rutgers Testing Program
Dashboard](https://coronavirus.rutgers.edu/health-and-safety/testing-program-dashboard/)
hinted at this last week, when the proportion of positive tests in New
Brunswick jumped to a record 5.09%.

![nb-covid](/images/nb-covid.png)

How severe will those cases be? The data here is murkier. It ranges from "less
severe than Delta" to "about as severe as Delta," even among the vaccinated.
[Four countries to
watch](https://www.businessinsider.com/omicron-covid-cases-records-norway-denmark-uk-south-africa-2021-12)
are:

1. Denmark
2. United Kingdom
3. Norway
4. South Africa (where Omicron was first detected)

Initial reports out of South Africa indicated that [infections were less
severe](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/17/world/south-africa-omicron-hospitalizations.html).
Reports from Denmark seem mixed. [State epidemiologists suggest that those
without boosters are just as vulnerable to Omicron as the
unvaccinated](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2021/12/18/omicron-variant-denmark/),
and hospitalization levels are rising quickly:

![Omicron bad](/images/covid-denmark.png)

On the other hand, all of these countries have very low death rates compared to
their high case numbers:

![Omicron good](/images/covid-death.png)

And the CDC projects that Omicron now accounts for around 92% of *all*
sequenced cases New York / New Jersey area, but hospitalization rates in New
York City are low:

![nyc-cases](/images/nyc-cases.png)

![nyc-hospital](/images/nyc-hospital.png)
([NYC Health](https://www1.nyc.gov/site/doh/covid/covid-19-data-totals.page))

But deaths and hospitalizations will lag behind cases.

Put together, it is unclear how severe Omicron will be, even among the fully
vaccinated. The good news is that
[Moderna](https://www.cnn.com/2021/12/20/health/moderna-booster-omicron-bn/index.html)
and
[Pfizer](https://www.pfizer.com/news/press-release/press-release-detail/pfizer-and-biontech-provide-update-omicron-variant)
both report that their boosters are effective against Omicron. The *boosted*
population is likely protected from serious illness.

This brings us to the third question: *When* will we know how severe Omicron
is? We are just waiting on the CDC, the Danes, the Brits, or anyone to collect
more data. It might be a week or more before we have better answers.

What should the administration do? They have an unclear picture, an uncertain
timeline to learn more, and need to make a decision in the next month or so, if
not sooner.

As scary as these case counts look, we cannot overstate how awful it would be
to shut Rutgers down for another semester.

Online college is terrible. Other than the obvious problems with online
learning, college is meant to be in-person. Classroom experience is trivial
compared to experiences outside the classroom, surrounded by your peers. These
cannot be replicated in a Zoom breakout room while you lay in bed.

Rutgers functioned exceedingly well this Fall. There was an indoor mask
mandate, a vaccine requirement, and some restrictions on large, indoor
gatherings. They all *worked*. As far as I can tell there has not been
a significant number of seriously ill students, faculty, or staff. That
includes the Delta surge. It has more-or-less been business as usual.

We had the tools to fight Delta, and we have the tools to fight Omicron.
Rutgers has COVID tests, plenty of booster shots, and contact tracers. If we
want to be in the best shape possible for the Spring, then we should bring all
of these to bear. Concretely, we should do something like the following:

1. Open testing for *all* members of the community (not just the unvaccinated).
2. Encourage or require all students on campus to receive a booster shot.

We completed an in-person Fall semester with few hiccups, and unless the data
gets remarkably worse, I believe we can do it again in the Spring if we act
accordingly.
