---
title: Held to Account
hide: true
---

A few weeks ago, I asked my fellow graduate students to give their list of the
"Top N Mathematicians of All Time." In return, I was [publicly shamed by
Corrine Yap](https://twitter.com/corrine_yap/status/1461473396726796289). She
delivered a talk to the graduate students entitled "A Clapback Talk: what a
recent Slack thread reveals about inclusivity in math." My question created an
unsafe and exclusionary space in the department, and Yap intended to "hold me
accountable for my actions."

Well, consider me held to account.

Yap's arguments fall in two main directions.

1. Mathematics is not a competition, and we shouldn't rank people.

2. Mathematics has historically excluded women, and by not acknowledging this
we perpetuate that exclusion.

## MATHEMATICS IS A COMPETITION

Yap's favorite phrase is "mathematics does not exist in a vacuum." I agree, it
does not. It exists in societies with finite resources. We can't hand over
infinite amounts of time and money so that very privileged people can sit in
lecture halls all day thinking about "mathematical truth." It is lovely that
mathematics is a boundless ocean of knowledge or whatever, but we have houses
to build, bridges to repair, and doctors to train.

We have finitely many dollars to do mathematics. How do we allocate them? We
can only afford to accept so many graduate students, hire so many professors,
fund so many postdocs, and so on. It would be stupid to make these choices at
random, so we have systems to decide who gets money. You're welcome to pretend
these systems don't exist, but most people will work to put themselves in the
"funded" category. This is competition.

Unless you think we should put limitless funds into mathematics (and we
probably literally *can't*), mathematics as a social activity will not exist
without competition.

In the Rutgers mathematics department, graduate students are privileged enough
to ignore competition. You have to compete to get here, but after that you're
basically safe. You don't have to apply for grants or fellowships or anything
like that. Just pass your exams, don't harass your students, and you get money
for five to seven years. Everyone is allowed to do more-or-less whatever they
want and poor performance has few consequences. We sit in a cushy ivory tower
and talk about how "it's not a competition." Nonsense.

I like to compare this state of affairs to sports. Despite what your
closed-minded academic friends might think, sports are an art form. They
reflect the extremes of humanity: Camaraderie. Rivalries. Triumphs. Falls.
Determination. Pettiness. All of human nature on display, driven by superstar,
larger-than-life figures.

At first glance, athletes at the highest levels seem like special people. They
want glory, to be champions, to be one of the greats. [Michael Jordan takes
everything personal?](youtube.com/watch?v=Ss5Ndz0tn9o) Inject that shit into my
veins. [Tom Brady counting off all six quarterbacks picked before
him?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o5fdhfVrg1I) More please. ["I'm the
greatest fighter that ever stepped foot in the ring," said Muhammad
Ali.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sV1cK8loEWI)

But we love them because they are *not* special. Athletes are like "funhouse
mirror" reflections of ourselves. Competition, envy, and greed are normal. They
drive us to be better.

Richard Hamming says as much in ["You and Your
Research"](https://www.cs.virginia.edu/~robins/YouAndYourResearch.html):

> At Los Alamos I was brought in to run the computing machines which other
people had got going, so those scientists and physicists could get back to
business. I saw I was a stooge. I saw that although physically I was the same,
they were different. And to put the thing bluntly, I was envious.

Chess grandmaster Bobby Fischer said that the greatest pleasure of winning a
game of chess is ["when you break [your opponent's]
ego.](https://youtu.be/boyYKCr3T8w?t=349) Hardy wrote "A man's first duty, a
young man's at any rate, is to be ambitious." Even *Obama* is competitive:

> Mr. Obama's obsession with virtuosity and proving himself the best are
remarkable. ... More than a tic, friends and aides say, it is a core part of
his worldview, formed as an outsider child who grew up to defy others' views of
the limits of his abilities.

If you are, by nature, less competitive than your peers, or find it
distasteful, that's fine. No one is forcing you to be as intense as Michael
Jordan or Tiger Woods. However, do not expect to be funded to prance around
academia forever. There is no "right" to be an academic. If you want to be one,
accept competition.

## EVERYTHING IS EXCLUSIONARY

We can all agree: Mathematics was grotesquely exclusionary until like, twenty
years ago. There are probably ways that it still is. We should look into that.
But what does this have to do with how great Euler was?

Again, I wish more of us were sports fans.

When I look at the greatest basketball players of all time, I don't find a lot
of 5'9" Whites from South Carolina. I don't see a lot of Asians, or Hispanics,
or anything else. Just Black men. And that's...fine? I don't see how this takes
anything away from me. Of course, I'm White, so maybe I'm just "letting them
have one." Then why is the NBA the biggest sports league in China, despite
having only *one* good Chinese player ever? What would Yap's objection in this
context even look like? I walk into a pickup game and ask everyone to stop
yelling "Kobe" when they take a shot?

Maybe there would have been dozens of incredibly influential female
mathematicians if we were more welcoming to them. Maybe Frederick Douglass
would have been a legendary president if America were not suffocated by racism
during his life. Maybe every poor kid in Missouri on food stamps could be the
next Einstein if they had the resources.

Maybe maybe maybe maybe. Maybe this, maybe that. We don't know. We can't know.
There infinitely many "maybes," and every choice produces infinitely more. We
cannot refuse to talk about the past because someone was excluded. All we can
do is make choices *now* based on what happened.

No one is excluded from mathematics by being left off the list of "best
mathematicians." They are excluded because of things that people did in the
past. That's a shame. We shouldn't do those things anymore. But we also can't
change what was done in the past.

If you want to discuss "most promising mathematicians which were not allowed to
do mathematics," then go for it. I love "what if's." But this is simply a
*different* discussion than "most influential mathematicians," not a *better*
one. To suggest that having either discussion in public is harmful or "unsafe"
is just as naive as saying that "mathematics is not a competition."

The really sinister thing here is that the charge of "being exclusionary" is
too vague to answer. How could you possibly prove that you are *not* being
exclusionary? It's a rhetorical flourish to combat a deeper problem: There are
not enough women in mathematics Ph.D programs.

Roughly 40% of mathematics undergraduates are women, but that drops to 25% in
Ph.D programs. That's a big gap. Yap, like many of us, thinks that there are
"bad things" dissuading women from joining Ph.D programs, and she would like to
fix them. But Yap, like most of us, doesn't have much control. You can only
attend so many conferences for women, run so many woman-focused organizations,
and lobby so hard for your graduate director to accept more women before you
realize that changing demographics is very slow. So, if you're really driven to
bring in more women and secure their place in academia, you have to find
something else to do.

In this case, Yap decided that the thing to do is drag people into public and
"hold them accountable" for their speech.

This tactic is remarkably effective. In the days leading up to Yap's talk, my
friends discussed how bad it would be for me. Would I be ridiculed? Would Yap
ask me to apologize in front of everyone? Some encouraged me to not go, warning
that the discussion could get out of hand and have consequences for me. On the
way to the talk, I heard an officemate ask if everyone were ready for "Robert's
roast."

Yap used her goodwill and social standing in the department to bully me from
a pulpit. While a respected speaker with the ear of authority encouraged
a crowd to "hold me accountable," I wondered: Did we truly need to have this
conversation, or is Yap just lashing out because the community isn't exactly
how she likes it?
