---
title: The 2022 International Congress of Mathematics is Cancelled
hide: true
---

Russia invaded Ukraine last week.

Somewhere near the bottom of everyone's concerns was whether the 2022
International Congress of Mathematicians (ICM), scheduled to take place in St.
Petersburg this Summer, would continue as planned. There has been a [proposed
boycott](http://www.icm2022boycott.org/) of the 2022 ICM since the location was
announced in 2018, but it was set to fail until last week. Now the boycotters
get their wish: The 2022 ICM will take place online, effectively declaring
Russia as unsuitable to host.

The decision to cancel the ICM in Russia is good for the following reasons.

1. It is physically difficult to enter Russia from the West right now, it may
   get worse, and we have no idea when it will get better. The European Union
   closed air space to Russian airlines and [the US may do the
   same](https://www.reuters.com/business/aerospace-defense/airspace-closures-hit-airlines-finnair-falls-21-2022-02-28/).
   (Currently, the only way I see to get to St. Petersburg by air from New York
   is staying overnight in Turkey.)

2. Russia is hostile to political dissent. Academics famously bristle at even
   *perceived* offenses. Russia just invaded a peaceful neighbor without any
   provocation. How many mathematicians made statements condemning Russia's
   actions? How many [signatories on the
   boycott](http://www.icm2022boycott.org/#signatories) are concerned about
   retribution? The Russian government [tried to
   assassinate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poisoning_of_Alexei_Navalny)
   domestic political opponents *recently*. The odds of them doing anything
   similar to a foreigner are probably slim, but not zero.

However, I am dubious of a strong *moral* case to cancel the ICM. Here is what
the boycotters wrote:

> Under these circumstances, the decision of [International Mathematical Union]
to hold the Congress in Russia demonstrates either moral indifference or
ignorance about the actions of Putin's regime.

This seems to suggest that the ICM has some power to change the Russian
government. This is wrong. The ICM has zero power over anything in the
countries it visits. Having the meeting in Russia does not contribute to the
bad things that Russia does, and *not* having the meeting does not contribute
to anything good. In this sense the meeting is very low-stakes, which is why
the reasons above are more than enough to cancel it.

Every time we do something to hurt or influence Russia, be it something silly
like cancelling the ICM or something serious like imposing new sanctions, we
escalate the current conflict. And as Matthew Yglesias [recently
wrote](https://www.slowboring.com/p/23-thoughts-on-the-war-in-ukraine?s=r), "We
can't just escalate and escalate. There has to be some goal in mind that counts
as a win and lets people back down."

Blanket anti-Russian sentiments will needlessly hurt and isolate Russians. Here
is Russian social scientist Ilya Matveev, complaining about exactly this in
academia:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">I&#39;m so disgusted
with rejection letters, invitation cancellations, grant withdrawals etc.
against Russian scholars from Western academics who fight Putinism by attacking
those who have suffered from it for decades.</p>&mdash; Ilya Matveev
(@IlyaMatveev_) <a
href="https://twitter.com/IlyaMatveev_/status/1498404492009689091?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">February
28, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

We need to ask what the purpose of every action is now, and "shunning Russian
academics" is not a good purpose. When the US does something bad (which happens
from time to time), I don't stop paying taxes. I don't refuse to participate in
society. I don't leave the country. And I don't expect Russians to do any of
this either. There is a case to punish the Russian state and Russians that
represent the state, but we should not punish Russians *just* because of their
nationality.

Fortunately the ICM is very inconsequential. The macro-level decisions that
matter are firmly outside of mathematicians' hands, which is good for the rest
of the world.
