---
title: Russian Cancel Culture
---

Somewhere near the bottom of the world's concerns last week was whether the
2022 International Congress of Mathematicians (ICM), scheduled to take place in
St. Petersburg this Summer, would continue as planned. There had been
a [proposed boycott](http://www.icm2022boycott.org/) since the location was
announced in 2018, but it was set to fail until last week. But then Russia
invaded Ukraine and the boycotters got their wish. [The 2022 ICM will take
place
online](https://www.mathunion.org/fileadmin/IMU/ICM2022/ICM_2022_statement.pdf),
effectively declaring Russia as unsuitable to host.

Moving the ICM from Russia was a good decision for the following reasons.

1. It is physically difficult to enter Russia from the West right now, it may
   get worse, and we have no idea when it will get better. Since [the European
   Union and the US closed their air space to Russian
   airlines](https://www.washingtonpost.com/transportation/2022/03/01/airspace-russia-ukraine/),
   the only way I see to get to St. Petersburg by air from New York is staying
   overnight in Turkey.

2. Russia may become more hostile to political dissent after the invasion. The
   Russian government is [already famously intolerant of
   dissent](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poisoning_of_Alexei_Navalny), but
   even countries with better track records do bad things during crises. Harsh
   sanctions and a gruelling war may be such a crisis for the Putin government.
   How many [signatories on the
   boycott](http://www.icm2022boycott.org/#signatories) are concerned about
   retribution?

However, I am worried about overstating the moral case here. Putin is doing
something bad, and we should discourage him. But the ICM has nothing to do with
that. The ICM has no power over anything in the countries it visits. Having the
meeting in Russia does not contribute to the bad things that Russia does, and
*not* having the meeting does not contribute to anything good. In this sense
the meeting is very low-stakes, which is why the reasons above are more than
enough to move it.

But the boycotters think there was a genuine moral case for moving the meeting.
They wrote the following before Russia invaded Ukraine:

> Under these circumstances, the decision of [the International Mathematical
Union] to hold the Congress in Russia demonstrates either moral indifference or
ignorance about the actions of Putin's regime.

If we apply this argument to everything Russia has any involvement in, no
matter how insignificant (and the ICM is insignificant!), then we should
boycott essentially everything and everyone from Russia. Lots of very
politically ineffective things have been done recently inspired by this
argument.

Here is the Glasgow Film Festival announcing the removal of two Russian films
seemingly because they are Russian:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">A statement from
Glasgow Film Festival. <a
href="https://t.co/HjyYXhYPCJ">pic.twitter.com/HjyYXhYPCJ</a></p>&mdash;
Glasgow Film Festival (@glasgowfilmfest) <a
href="https://twitter.com/glasgowfilmfest/status/1498315807176073219?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">February
28, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

Here is, for some reason, EA Sports announcing that the Russian national teams
would be removed from FIFA 22:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">A statement from EA
SPORTS FIFA: <a
href="https://t.co/v3pZvpblgS">pic.twitter.com/v3pZvpblgS</a></p>&mdash; EA
SPORTS FIFA (@EASPORTSFIFA) <a
href="https://twitter.com/EASPORTSFIFA/status/1499057030857777154?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">March
2, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

These are both silly. They will not pressure the Putin regime nor help anyone
in Ukraine. However, they will also not seriously harm anyone innocent. Some
reactions to the invasion are not so kind.

Here is the former US ambassador to Russia, Michael McFaul, claiming that there
are no "innocent" Russians anymore:

![There are no more “innocent” “neutral” Russians anymore. Everyone has to make
a choice— support or oppose this war. The only way to end this war is if
100,000s, not thousands, protest against this senseless war. Putin can’t arrest
you all!](../images/mcfaul.png)

Here is Russian social scientist, Ilya Matveev, complaining about retributions
in academia:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">I&#39;m so disgusted
with rejection letters, invitation cancellations, grant withdrawals etc.
against Russian scholars from Western academics who fight Putinism by attacking
those who have suffered from it for decades.</p>&mdash; Ilya Matveev
(@IlyaMatveev_) <a
href="https://twitter.com/IlyaMatveev_/status/1498404492009689091?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">February
28, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

The Putin regime is doing something bad and we should discourage its behavior.
But everything we try---from something silly like moving the ICM, to something
serious like imposing new sanctions---might escalate the current conflict. And
as Matthew Yglesias [recently
wrote](https://www.slowboring.com/p/23-thoughts-on-the-war-in-ukraine?s=r), "We
can't just escalate and escalate. There has to be some goal in mind that counts
as a win and lets people back down." Shunning everything related to the Russian
government is not a sufficiently targeted goal.

Fortunately we don't seem to be moving towards Russian internment camps or
anything like that in the West. If all we do is remove Russian national teams
from some sports games and disinvite a few filmmakers, then I am not so
worried. But I hope that our [newfound moral clarity about
Russia](https://noahpinion.substack.com/p/a-moment-of-clarity?s=r) does not go
too far. We have run into trouble with this in the past.
