---
title: Abortion in the Sunshine State
---

It looks like *Roe v. Wade* [will be overturned this
year](https://www.politico.com/news/2022/05/02/supreme-court-abortion-draft-opinion-00029473).
After decades of being a talking point and pro-life activist issue, abortion
will probably become a mainstream political question again. State legislatures,
unable to hide behind *Roe*, will have to enact laws that express a concrete
position on abortion access. Given the immense importance of this issue,
I would like to promote a state that I think shows a promising way forward:
Florida.

To show my cards, I think easy access to abortions is good for everyone. With
respect to the people of Mississippi, I don't buy [their state's
claim](https://www.brookings.edu/research/what-can-economic-research-tell-us-about-the-effect-of-abortion-access-on-womens-lives/)
that "there is simply no causal link between the availability of abortion and
the capacity of women to act in society." Socioeconomic conditions improve when
women are better educated and have easy access to contraceptives, and abortion
almost certainly has similar effects. If we can offset the inherent
inequalities women experience related to pregnancy, then we should. Access to
abortion does this.

With this in mind, I am not concerned about states that already have very
permissive abortion laws. They have already, or will soon, protect abortion
access as far as they are constitutionally able. The states I am concerned
about are those with more restrictive laws, particularly those where public
opinion is sharply divided.

To see which states I mean, look at Pew's [exellent collection of polls on
abortion by
state](https://www.pewresearch.org/religion/religious-landscape-study/compare/views-about-abortion/by/state/).
It's difficult to visualize the entire dataset, but here is a snapshot:

![Pew abortion table](/images/pew-abortion.png)

Barring a national abortion ban (which we should not rule out!), Washington DC,
Vermont, and Massachusetts—all with 70% or higher pro-choice support—are not
going to ban abortion. But states with support hovering around 50%, like
Georgia, Arizona, and Oklahoma, are not guaranteed to do the same. Republicans
and pro-life activists *are* pushing for restrictive abortion laws in these
places, and they may very well enact them if they win the right elections.
Political victories for Democrats (or perhaps moderate Republicans) states
would make an enormous difference in protecting abortion access.

This brings us to Florida. Florida is one of those borderline states. On one
hand, about half the state thinks abortion should be always or mostly legal. On
the other hand, it's a fairly red state, they just passed the so-called "Don't
Say Gay" bill, and [nearly 40% of the state thinks abortion should be
completely or mostly
banned!](https://www.pewresearch.org/religion/religious-landscape-study/state/florida/views-about-abortion/).
Outside of a strong federal law or the Supreme Court forcing their hand, the
Sunshine State is just not going to provide unlimited access to abortions.

And yet, Florida Republicans did *not* ban abortion! With the governor, the
state legislature, and 40% of voters on their side, Florida Republicans
proposed a law that only bans abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy. Despite the
[scary New York Times
article](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/03/us/florida-abortion-ban.html) about
this, this is a great compromise. Around 90% of abortions in America occur
before 15 weeks. This law is more restrictive than the status quo, but 90%
versus 0% is a big difference for the millions of women in Florida.

Most importantly, the Florida bill is in line with what Americans broadly want
on abortion. Look at this table from
[Gallup](https://news.gallup.com/poll/1576/abortion.aspx):

![Gallup opinion poll on abortion](/images/gallup-abortion.png)

Around 60% of Americans support legal abortion in the first trimester. That's
a good majority, but support *plummets* after that. Almost 65% of Americans
think abortion should be illegal in the second trimester, and ***80%*** of
Americans think abortion should be illegal in the third trimester. Unless
a dramatic shift in public opinion occurs in the next few decades (and it has
*not* in the decades since *Roe* was decided), we have to accept that some
access to abortion will be lost.

So, for states that are incredibly pro-choice, I am happy that access to
abortion will be as strong as possible. In other states, Democrats should shout
from the rooftops that they are happy to take a Florida-like bill. This is in
line with public opinion, it's in line with much of the Western world, and it's
the way to protect abortion access where it's threatened.
