---
title: A case for government
---

I'm a big believer in government. A robust state which provides services to
itself and its citizens is good. Our particular institutions do a lot of
valuable work that is taken for granted.

I want more smart people to go into public service, and fewer smart people
doing [weird, illegal finance
things](https://www.nbcnews.com/business/business-news/sam-bankman-fried-verdict-ftx-trial-rcna123158).
So, below are two brief examples of good government that I hope might inspire
some plucky students to consider becoming bureaucrats.

# SNAP

The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), also known as food
stamps, is a federal program that gives low-income Americans money for food. It
feeds millions of Americans who might otherwise go hungry.

A great part of SNAP is that it's dirt cheap. It seems untoward, but cost is an
important part of welfare programs. How many people need money? How much will
we give them? How much will this improve their standards of living? Helping
people is good, but there's a big difference between a billion dollars and
a trillion dollars. SNAP comes in at under [three
percent](https://www.usaspending.gov/agency/department-of-agriculture?fy=2023)
of the annual federal budget.

We knew that SNAP would be affordable thanks to estimates from the
[Congressional Budget Office (CBO)](https://www.cbo.gov/), whose economists and
policy analysts model costs and budgetary effects. CBO models run on
information from the [Department of Agriculture
(USDA)](https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program),
which administers SNAP, the [Census Bureau](https://www.census.gov/), which
collects demographic information, and the [Federal
Reserve](https://www.federalreserve.gov/), which monitors economic conditions.

The planning and analysis of SNAP implicates a handful of federal agencies, but
the day to day operations are handled by states themselves, which gives us more
than fifty agencies and probably thousands of employees. This sounds like
a vast bureaucracy, but employees are very cheap! The total cost of *all*
federal employees in 2019 was around [300 billion
dollars](https://www.cato.org/blog/yes-cut-federal-government-its-workforce),
which is roughly the cost of SNAP itself.

For a tiny portion of annual spending, the federal government gets an army of
dedicated public servants who provide quality data, analysis, and oversight
related to of a wide array of programs like SNAP. This is an excellent and
often overlooked feature of the federal government.

# The Little Rock Nine

In 1957, [nine black Americans](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Little_Rock_Nine)
enrolled in Little Rock Central High School. They had been barred from
attending by segregation, but the Supreme Court had just ruled that this was
[unconstitutional](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brown_v._Board_of_Education)[^irony].
In a shocking move, Arkansas governor Orval Faubus defied the Supreme Court and
ordered the Arkansas National Guard to forcibly block the students from
entering school.

[^irony]: The Court also *upheld* segregation years earlier, but American
            segregation was happening before the Court ever said a word about it.

The federal government obviously has to intervene here. You can't have
governors using pseudo-armies to defy court orders. It isn't as feel-good as
feeding hungry people, but an important function of government is maintaining
order and enforcing laws. Fortunately, President Eisenhower understood this and
sent in the Army.

> Whenever normal agencies prove inadequate to the task and it becomes
necessary for the Executive Branch of the Federal Government to use its powers
and authority to uphold Federal Courts, the President's responsibility is
inescapable.
>
> In accordance with that responsibility, I have today issued an Executive
Order directing the use of troops under Federal authority to aid in the
execution of Federal law at Little Rock, Arkansas. This became necessary when
my Proclamation of yesterday was not observed, and the obstruction of justice
still continues.
>
> *---President Eisenhower, 1957*

Eisenhower's ability to do this requires a lot of moving parts.

First, there needs to be a federal law enforcement mechanism which can force
states to do things. That's a professional military. Second, there needs to be
some legitimate authority for the President to use force to restore order.
Congress provided this in the [Insurrection Act of
1807](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insurrection_Act_of_1807). Finally, the
President needs to have the character to use the tools at his disposal wisely.
We can't have the military shooting pickpockets in New York City.

It's an old American pastime to complain about Congress and the president, but
they are public servants who make important legislative and executive
decisions. Had Congress not recognized the importance of a strong military, if
they had been more squeamish about enforcing laws, or if Eisenhower had been
a little racist himself, school integration could have played out very
differently.

# Conclusion

Government is necessary, but *good* government takes good public servants. We
need more smart people in every branch, every agency, and every office. Math
students tend to not have the charisma necessary to be politicians[^ira], but
there are a lot of other good options!

[^ira]: Though there was [Ira Glasser](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ira_Glasser), so you never know.

There are openings every summer at the [Department of
Energy](https://www.energy.gov/energysaver/internships-fellowships-graduate-and-postdoctoral-opportunities),
the NSA always wants mathematicians (but has some questionable hiring
practices), and you definitely qualify for jobs in the [1500
series](https://www.usajobs.gov/Search/Results?j=1501&j=1510&j=1515&j=1520&j=1521&j=1529&j=1530&j=1531&j=1541&j=1550&j=1560&j=1598&j=1599).
This includes jobs at Census, IRS, GAO, NIST, Treasury, and more. If you are
interested in the judiciary, then you will be comforted to know that math
students tend to do pretty well on the LSAT.

I would encourage all math students to at least consider an internship in
government. You can spare one summer to try it out!
