---
title: Gatekeeping AI art
date: 2024-01-17
---

Euclid wrote the
[*Elements*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclid%27s_Elements), laying out the
foundations of geometry and axiomatic mathematics, without any algebra. This
doesn't seem surprising (geometry is just pictures!) until you remember that
the book contains a chunk of elementary number theory. For example, here is
Euclid's proposition which implies that $\sqrt{2}$ is irrational:

> If between two numbers there fall numbers in continued proportion with them,
then, however many numbers fall between them in continued proportion, so many
also fall in continued proportion between the numbers which have the same
ratios with the original numbers.

If you have trouble seeing $\sqrt{2}$ here, don't worry; so does everyone who
reads the *Elements*. (Professor David Joyce, explaining how to parse this,
remarks ["If 1 is considered to be a number, the argument
simplifies."](http://aleph0.clarku.edu/~djoyce/elements/bookVIII/propVIII8.html))
With all due respect to Euclid, in hindsight we know that mediating all of
mathematics through lines and circles makes some things more difficult than
they need to be.

Things are better today now that we have symbolic notation. On occasion people
fall into a Euclid-style trap and say that mathematics *is* symbol crunching.
If you can move the right funny letters around in calculus, linear algebra, or
differential equations, then you're a "good student." But of course math is not
just symbol crunching, just like it isn't just lines and circles.

This historical outline guides me when thinking about AI generated art. There
has been a [lot of
uproar](https://www.eurogamer.net/the-games-industrys-response-to-ai-reverence-and-rage)
over the past few years from concerned artists about AI tools like
[Midjourney](https://www.midjourney.com/). Are these tools going to take jobs
from already-struggling artists? Are they just stealing original work and
repackaging it with fancy post-processing? And whatever you think, can't we
agree that "AI art" is not *real art*?

This sentiment that "AI art is not real art" seems mistaken. I understand that
creating art is very difficult, in the same way that drawing and reasoning
about complicated geometric diagrams is difficult. But are the techniques used
to create art today what art *is*? Can it really be said that if you aren't
drawing lines on a tablet, or putting paint on a canvas, you aren't *making
art*? I don't buy it.

I suspect that artists lashing out at AI art are more concerned about job
security than they are artistic ideals. And fair enough. AI art might not be
taking their jobs now, but it probably will. Just look at [*Cosmo*'s cover from
2022](https://www.cosmopolitan.com/lifestyle/a40314356/dall-e-2-artificial-intelligence-cover/),
or read the story of Kelly McKernan, whose [distinctive art style was
reproduced by an AI
startup](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/arts/visual-artists-fight-back-against-artificial-intelligence-companies-for-repurposing-their-work)
that McKernan is suing for copyright infringement. It is demoralizing to devote
a chunk of your life to something only for a newfangled machine to do it
better. And yet, like the old folk hero [John
Henry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Henry_(folklore)), you can fight
progress your whole life and accomplish nothing but dying.

AI art does not need to be the end of human art. If we, as a society, think
that human art is important, then we can fund it. We already *do* fund it in
various ways, like through the [National Endowment for the
Arts](https://www.arts.gov/)[^NEA]. I would be happy to see more money go that
way. We fund lots of things that no one would ever pay for on their
own[^academia], and art is one of the more noble things we could pick.

[^NEA]: NEA has a very neat map where you can see [how much money they put into individual states](https://www.arts.gov/impact/state-profiles).

[^academia]: Like most of academia. Does New Jersey *need* 100 math Ph.D students at its flagship university? No, of course not. But it's a nice, fairly cheap thing that brings in smart, motivated people and might pay off in unexpected ways. I'm very grateful to citizens of the Garden State for their generous support!

It's great that I can ask ChatGPT to explain things, and it's great that more
people can make art using tools like Midjourney. If you are worried about
a future where these tools are so widespread that AI does everything, a future
where your economic opportunities are extremely limited, a future where
humanity is left to passively observe a digital world, then you better start
writing blog posts saying nice things about ChatGPT before it takes over.
