---
title: You should vote for Kamala Harris
---

During the Civil War, Abraham Lincoln published a response to a letter by
Horace Greely, a newspaper editor who questioned Lincoln's position on slavery.
You can read the entire letter
[here](https://www.loc.gov/resource/mal.4233400/?st=image&r=-1.308,-0.157,3.615,3.132,0),
but the important parts are as follows:

> As to the policy I “seem to be pursuing,” as you say, I have not meant to leave any one in doubt.
>
> I would save the Union. I would save it the shortest way under the
Constitution. The sooner the national authority can be restored the nearer the
Union will be “the Union as it was.” If there be those who would not save the
Union unless they could at the same time save slavery, I do not agree with
them. If there be those who would not save the Union unless they could at the
same time destroy slavery, I do not agree with them. My paramount object in
this struggle is to save the Union, and is not either to save or to destroy
slavery. If I could save the Union without freeing any slave I would do it, and
if I could save it by freeing all the slaves I would do it; and if I could save
it by freeing some and leaving others alone, I would also do that. What I do
about slavery and the colored race, I do because I believe it helps to save the
Union; and what I forbear, I forbear because I do not believe it would help to
save the Union. I shall do less whenever I shall believe what I am doing hurts
the cause, and I shall do more whenever I shall believe doing more will help
the cause. I shall try to correct errors when shown to be errors; and I shall
adopt new views so fast as they shall appear to be true views.

Let's agree to ignore the bits about slavery. The point is that Lincoln was
committed to defending the Union, its laws, and the Constitution, even during
a time of extreme crisis. Americans should require any Presidential hopeful to
live up to the same standard.

Trump does not meet this standard. When he lost the 2020 election, he incited
a riot at the Capitol and pressured several government officials to commit
fraud on his behalf. While rioters chanted "Hang Mike Pence" and crawled
through the Capitol, Trump
[tweeted](https://www.the-independent.com/news/world/americas/us-politics/mike-pence-trump-impeachment-trial-b1800765.html)
that Mike Pence "didn't have the courage to do what should have been done."
After Trump lost Georgia, he [called the Georgia Secretary of
State](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trump%E2%80%93Raffensperger_phone_call)
and asked him to "find 11,780 votes" to flip the results. I want my public
officials *stopping* riots and *prosecuting* corruption, not the opposite.

With that in mind, I encourage every [*American
citizen*](https://apnews.com/article/michigan-student-noncitizen-voting-charges-china-19edcea1ca92ef163d50282dc55742ba)
to vote for Kamala Harris on Tuesday. Even if you don't like her or her
policies, we can get back to arguing over normal political questions once
candidates stop inciting riots at the Capitol and pressuring officials to
commit fraud on their behalf. Plus, just look at how [wonderful she did on
SNL](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ff-rqlU4ZWw) this weekend!

Here are some other important things to think about:

1. The Supreme Court currently has a 6-3 conservative majority. If Trump wins,
   this could become a 7-2 or even 8-1 majority. If you are lukewarm on both
   candidates, consider that Trump winning will lock in a conservative majority
   for perhaps the rest of your life, and maybe even some of your children's.
   This will make it increasingly harder to pass any laws that do anything, and
   also lead to more completely insane decisions like in the [presidential
   immunity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trump_v._United_States_(2024)) case.

2. Donald Trump is trying to avoid jail for several crimes he has committed.
   Whether you like these prosecutions or not (and there are good reasons to
   not like them), his only "get out of jail free" card is being President. If
   you hand a loaded gun to an escaped convict, do you think he'll go back to
   his cell when you ask nicely?

3. You can still watch [Tony
   Hinchcliffe](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/tony-hinchcliffe-criticized-by-comedians-rcna177862)
   if Trump loses. He has a [YouTube
   channel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z3lYdMfNDmc) and everything. No one
   is taking Shane Gillis away.

I admit, dear reader, that if you really don't like her policies, then it must
sting to vote for "lying Kamala." Maybe someday I can convince you that you
should become a Democrat. Or, who knows, maybe in 2028 Republicans will
nominate a new Reagan and you can convince me to get on board. Maybe we can
even agree to pass some voter ID laws before the midterms[^ID]! For now, let's
just agree to get back on track.

[^ID]: Because we have a [*real good* track record](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_ID_Act) enforcing laws about ID.
